Adding a blog post about multi-gateway IPFS client in Chromium. (#560)
ipfs/ipfs-blog: src/_blog/2023-05-multi-gateway-browser-client.md

---

> title: Multi-Gateway Browser Client

Reviewer: let's be clear it's ipfs support and also chromium and also frame the state of things... how about:

> IPFS Multi-Gateway Experiment in Chromium

## Where is the code?

In the repo you'll see separation between [component](https://github.com/little-bear-labs/ipfs-chromium/tree/main/component) and [library](https://github.com/little-bear-labs/ipfs-chromium/tree/main/library), where the former contains Chromium-specific code, and the latter contains code that helps with IPFS implementation details that can build without Chromium.

This distinction disappears when you switch over to the Chromium build. Both sets of source are dumped into a component (basically a submodule) called `ipfs`, that implements the handling of `ipfs://` and `ipns://` URLs.

Those who embed Chromium into another application generally provide an implementation of a couple of interfaces, namely `ContentClient` and `ContentBrowserClient`. They would need to add a little code to their implementations to use the `ipfs` component. Our repo contains a patch file which alters Chrome's implementations of these two as a demonstration to show how usage might work. That patch file might be useful as-is to someone who uses a patching approach to make a Chromium-derived browser.

## How (in more detail)?

### Hooking into Chromium

> * The `ipfs://` and `ipns://` schemes are registered in [ContentClient::AddAdditionalSchemes](https://source.chromium.org/chromium/chromium/src/+/main:content/public/common/content_client.h;l=156?q=AddAdditionalSchemes), so that the origin will be handled properly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The `ipfs://` and `ipns://` schemes are registered in [`ContentClient::AddAdditionalSchemes`](https://source.chromium.org/chromium/chromium/src/+/main:content/public/common/content_client.h;l=156?q=AddAdditionalSchemes), so that the origin will be handled properly.
```

##### UnixFS Node

The payload of these nodes have another ProtoBuf layer, and the DAG functions in a conceptually similar way to a read-only file system.

Not all kinds of UnixFS nodes are fully handled yet, but we cover these:

###### File (simple case)

These nodes each have a data byte array that is the contents of a file. We'll use those bytes as the body of a response.

###### File (multi-node)

In UnixFS a node can represent a file as the concatenation of other file nodes, to which it has links. The decision to use this kind of node generally has to do with the size of the file. A single node can't be much more than a megabyte, so files larger than that get cut into chunks and handled as a tree of nodes. There are a couple of reasons for that:

* Data deduplication (it's possible the same sequences of bytes, and thus same CID, appears in multiple files or even within the same file)

> * In the case that a gateway were malicious, we wouldn't want to wait until a file of potentially unbounded size finishes downloading before we verify that it's correct. It is worth mentioning that as of today ipfs-chromium does not enforce this limit.

Author: Addressed this by changing the sentence entirely, since as of the latest code pull request it does actually enforce a limit.
ATM it's 2MB not 2MiB. I'm open to switching that if it's better.

This is for directories with just too many entries in them. The links from this directory node might be entries in the directory or they might be other HAMT nodes referring to the same directory (basically, the directory itself is getting split up over a tree of nodes).

* If you're coming in from another HAMT node, you might have some unused bits of the hash to select the next child.
* If you have a path, hash the name of the item you're looking for, pop the correct number of bits off the hash, and use it to select which element you're going to next.
* If you don't have a path, we'll assume you want index.html.
* We don't generate listings of sharded directories today, and this isn't a high-priority as it's an unreasonable use case.

### Dealing with ipns:// links

The first element after `ipns://` is the "name".

* If the name is formatted as a CIDv1, and has its codec set to "libp2p-key", ipfs-client will retrieve a signed record of what it points at from a gateway, and then load that content.
  * The cryptographic signature in the record is verified using the public key, which corresponds to the "name"

>   * Note: not all CID [multibase](https://docs.ipfs.tech/concepts/glossary/#multibase) encodings are supported yet.

Author: In addition to 36, it does also support 32 & 58. Of course, 58 is case-sensitive, so it doesn't work in the address bar.
16 would be pretty easy to add if we cared.

IPNS names may point to other IPNS names, in which case this process recurses. More commonly they point at an IPFS DAG, in which case ipfs-chromium will then load that content as described above.

## Bottom Line

So, in the end, the user gets to treat `ipfs://` links to snapshotted data like any other link, gets the result in a reasonable timeframe, and can rely on the data they get back being the correct data, without being very easily tracked.

`ipns://` URLs of the DNSLink variety rely only on DNS being accurate.
Regular `ipns://` URLs, however, are verified by the cryptographically signed [record](https://specs.ipfs.tech/ipns/ipns-record/).

## Trying it out

If you want to try this yourself today, you can [build it](https://github.com/little-bear-labs/ipfs-chromium/blob/main/BUILDING.md) from source, or you may install a pre-built v0.0.0.1 binary from [GitHub releases](https://github.com/little-bear-labs/ipfs-chromium/releases/tag/0.0.0.1) or [an IPFS gateway](https://ipfs.io/ipfs/bafybeiejovt6ykqitq5senanjrizhk7ce3ynij4ckmoc5tod4jyz6umyp4).

If you'd just like to see it in action, here are the links I use in the video below:

> * [ipfs://bafybeifufjbspyjxki5bv62caao4kz5uqlpd73pcfytfdhwsa63sobmqlm/](ipfs://bafybeifufjbspyjxki5bv62caao4kz5uqlpd73pcfytfdhwsa63sobmqlm/) - a snapshot of this blog post
> * [ipns://bafzaajaiaejcaxykhmgsz2mhscluhm6bkliibattya2l2lld7scqr64c4ine2u7c/](ipns://bafzaajaiaejcaxykhmgsz2mhscluhm6bkliibattya2l2lld7scqr64c4ine2u7c/) - a mutable pointer to the current version of this blog
> * [ipns://docs.ipfs.tech](ipns://docs.ipfs.tech) - The IPFS documentation.
> * [ipns://en.wikipedia-on-ipfs.org/wiki/](ipns://en.wikipedia-on-ipfs.org/wiki/) - Wikipedia, as a big HAMT + DNSLink
> * [ipns://ipfs.io/](ipns://ipfs.io/) - an unusual case: a DNSLink to another DNSLink
> * [https://littlebearlabs.io](https://littlebearlabs.io) - an HTTPs URL for comparison.

Reviewer 2: native URIs are not supported by the blog engine, and will produce broken links:

```html
<a href="/2023-05-multigateway-chromium-client/ipfs://bafybeifufjbspyjxki5bv62caao4kz5uqlpd73pcfytfdhwsa63sobmqlm/" class="">ipfs://bafybeifufjbspyjxki5bv62caao4kz5uqlpd73pcfytfdhwsa63sobmqlm/</a>
```
my suggestion is to replace them with code quotes:

```suggestion
* `ipfs://bafybeifufjbspyjxki5bv62caao4kz5uqlpd73pcfytfdhwsa63sobmqlm/` - a snapshot of this blog post
* `ipns://bafzaajaiaejcaxykhmgsz2mhscluhm6bkliibattya2l2lld7scqr64c4ine2u7c/` - a mutable pointer to the current version of this blog
* `ipns://docs.ipfs.tech` - The IPFS documentation.
* `ipns://en.wikipedia-on-ipfs.org/wiki/` - Wikipedia, as a big HAMT + DNSLink
* `ipns://ipfs.io` - an unusual case: a DNSLink to another DNSLink
* `https://littlebearlabs.io` - an HTTPs URL for comparison.
```

> <video style="width:70%" controls playsinline><source src="../assets/tryitout.webm" /><source src="../assets/tryitout.mkv" /><source src="../assets/tryitout.mp4" /></video>

Reviewer 2: `<video>` tag is also not supported by this vuepress instance: either we need to add a plugin for this, or replace with image that links to `.webm`

>[https://bafybeihpy2n6vwt2jjq5gusv23ajtilzbao3ekfb2hiev2xvuxscdxqcp4.ipfs.dweb.link/](https://bafybeihpy2n6vwt2jjq5gusv23ajtilzbao3ekfb2hiev2xvuxscdxqcp4.ipfs.dweb.link/)

In each case, you're delegating all the "IPFS stuff", including CID (hash) verification, to a particular node. This is effective for completing requests, but has some trade-offs, including the privacy and integrity risks when using a remote gateway provided by a third-party.

### Performance

If the gateway you're using happens to have the data you're seeking already on-hand, your performance will be great, since it can simply return to you what it already has. Perforance might even be better than the multi-gateway client, since no extraneous requests would be made. However, if you were unlucky, that gateway will have to spend more time querying the IPFS network to try to find the data you request before it gives up. The ideal gateway to use may very well depend on what you happen to be doing at the moment - and may differ from one of your tabs to another. A multi-gateway client will have the worst case performance more rarely.

> It's also conceivable that for a sufficiently large file which exists on multiple gateways you're talking to, a verifying multi-gateway client might be able to beat a single-gateway client, since you might be pulling down parts of the file from different sources concurrently. [RAPIDE](https://pl-strflt.notion.site/RAPIDE-3c4fb9e159ae471bb426bb81855cee16) is a more advanced client which also makes use of this principle (along with other things).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It's also conceivable that for a sufficiently large file which exists on multiple gateways you're talking to, a verifying multi-gateway client might be able to beat a single-gateway client, since you might be pulling down parts of the file from different sources concurrently. [RAPIDE](https://github.com/ipfs/go-libipfs-rapide/issues/12) is a more advanced in development client which also makes use of this principle (along with other things).
```

> And while we've been talking about "files" for the most part, IPFS breaks larger files down into "blocks". You can apply these same techniques at the block level. Rapide is an implementation of this which is showing promising results - watch a [recent talk from IPFS Thing by Jorropo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cv01ePa0G58) on it. Perhaps native browser implementations could integrate these approaches for further improving performance - perhaps even beating regular HTTP web performance.

Reviewer 3: I think we should merge these paragraphs.  The second paragraph talks about RAPIDE as if we hadn't just spoken about it in the previous paragraph.

### Installation (vs. local gateway)

If you're reading this, installing a local node might seem like no big deal to you. However, we want IPFS to be accessible to people who haven't heard of it, and make it easy for them to click a link without having to think about which protocol-handling software they have installed ahead of time.

One approach is to have the browser install and start its own IPFS node. This is a pretty reasonable approach, but it can raise questions about when to dedicate resources to installation or the node's [daemon](https://docs.ipfs.tech/concepts/glossary/#daemon). The most notable example of this approach is [Brave](https://brave.com/ipfs-support/).

![Brave IPFS Choice](../assets/brave-choice.png)

> However, regardless of whether the browser manages a [Kubo](https://github.com/ipfs/kubo#readme) node as Brave does or implements IPFS natively, the architecture of the application has changed in a significant way - *from being strictly a client, to being a server*.

Reviewer 3: I don't think this sentence is quite right.

I assume our definition of a client is "a node that only sends bytes pertaining to bytes that it wants to receive.  It only makes requests; it doesn't send a response".  I agree it's not possible to accomplish today with Kubo.  But if one "implements IPFS natively" they could do this.  I think you're using a definition of "implement IPFS" that is more specific than the broad definition in https://specs.ipfs.tech/architecture/principles/ .  

```suggestion
However, if a browser manages a [Kubo](https://github.com/ipfs/kubo#readme) node as Brave does or implements its own full-featured node, the architecture of the application has changed in a significant way - *from being strictly a client, to being a server*.
```

## Where is the code?

In the repo you'll see separation between [component](https://github.com/little-bear-labs/ipfs-chromium/tree/main/component) and [library](https://github.com/little-bear-labs/ipfs-chromium/tree/main/library), where the former contains Chromium-specific code, and the latter contains code that helps with IPFS implementation details that can build without Chromium.

This distinction disappears when you switch over to the Chromium build. Both sets of source are dumped into a component (basically a submodule) called `ipfs`, that implements the handling of `ipfs://` and `ipns://` URLs.

Those who embed Chromium into another application generally provide an implementation of a couple of interfaces, namely `ContentClient` and `ContentBrowserClient`. They would need to add a little code to their implementations to use the `ipfs` component. Our repo contains a patch file which alters Chrome's implementations of these two as a demonstration to show how usage might work. That patch file might be useful as-is to someone who uses a patching approach to make a Chromium-derived browser.

## How (in more detail)?

### Hooking into Chromium

> * The `ipfs://` and `ipns://` schemes are registered in [`ContentClient::AddAdditionalSchemes`](https://source.chromium.org/chromium/chromium/src/+/main:content/public/common/content_client.h;l=156?q=AddAdditionalSchemes), so that the origin will be handled properly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The `ipfs://` and `ipns://` schemes are registered in [`ContentClient::AddAdditionalSchemes`](https://source.chromium.org/chromium/chromium/src/+/main:content/public/common/content_client.h;l=156?q=AddAdditionalSchemes) so that the origin will be handled properly.
```

(nit) I think here and below that "so" isn't supposed to be proceeded by a comma.

* If you don't have a path, we'll assume you want `index.html`
  * If there's no `index.html` we'll generate an directory listing HTML file for you.

###### [HAMT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hash_array_mapped_trie) (sharded) Directory

This is for directories with just too many entries in them to fit in a single block. The links from this directory node might be entries in the directory or they might be other HAMT nodes referring to the same directory (basically, the directory itself is getting split up over a tree of nodes).

* If you're coming in from another HAMT node, you might have some unused bits of the hash to select the next child.
* If you have a path, hash the name of the item you're looking for, pop the correct number of bits off the hash, and use it to select which element you're going to next.
* If you don't have a path, we'll assume you want `index.html`.
* We don't generate listings of sharded directories today, and this isn't a high-priority as it's an unreasonable use case.

### Dealing with ipns:// links

The first element after `ipns://` is the "[ipns-name](https://specs.ipfs.tech/ipns/ipns-record/#ipns-name)".

> * If the name is formatted as a CIDv1, and has its codec set to `libp2p-key` (`0x72`), ipfs-client will retrieve a [signed IPNS record](https://specs.ipfs.tech/ipns/ipns-record/#ipns-record) of what it points at from a gateway, and then load that content.

Reviewer 3: This is the first time where "ipfs-client" is used.  Define it?

  * The cryptographic signature in the record is verified using the public key, which corresponds to the "ipns-name"
  * Note: only two [multibase](https://docs.ipfs.tech/concepts/glossary/#multibase) encodings are fully supported for now: base36 and base32. If your IPNS or DNSLink record points to something base58 that should work, but otherwise avoid it (don't use it in the address bar!).
* If the name is not formatted as a CIDv1, a DNS request is created for the appropriate TXT record to resolve it as a [DNSLink](https://dnslink.dev/).

> IPNS names may point to other IPNS names, in which case this process recurses. More commonly they point at an IPFS DAG, in which case ipfs-chromium will then load that content as described above.

Reviewer 3: Do we put any recursion limits like browsers do with redirect loops?

Author: This POC implementation doesn't at the moment.
I have a vague memory of having attempted something like detecting infinite recursion, but I don't see that now for one reason or another.
I don't see any spec-limited number https://specs.ipfs.tech/ipns/ipns-record/
But certainly it's always OK to say "no" to infinity. 
For practicality reasons one could also pick a number like 10... has anyone seen a chain intentionally longer than ipns -> ipns -> ipns -> ipfs ?

## Bottom Line

> So, in the end, the user gets to treat `ipfs://` links to snapshotted data like any other link, gets the result in a reasonable timeframe, and can rely on the data they get back being the correct data, without being very easily tracked.

Reviewer 3: This is the first time we talk about tracking.  I don't think we explained the case for how there is less tracking.

If we're going to open that topic, do we want to discuss what headers we send to the HTTP gateways we're querying?  I think that will shed more light on how much tracking could be happening.  For example, will we send any cookies back to an HTTP gateway?

Author: There was some mild discussion of the point that was removed by request from PR comments. "very" is carrying quite a bit of weight here. Mostly the case for reduced tracking was just that the _same_ gateway wouldn't be able to see _everything_ you've requested - they'd only see bits and pieces of what you're up to.

This code sends no tracking headers to the gateways. I do want to reserve the right to set headers like "Accept" (right now not even doing that), but no PII should be _intentionally_ sent. Of course, they will have your public IP and such, and might be able to guess you're using this client by the sheer quantity of the `?format=raw` parameter. Also, we're using the browser's HTTP mechanisms here - I can't guarantee that no browser this ever gets merged into won't add some info to it.

Perhaps the easiest solution here is to _remove_ the final dependent clause - 's/, without[^\.]*//'

If you'd just like to see it in action, here are the links I use in the video below:

* `ipfs://bafybeigchjo5f3jyzfjwmbavhr27jwdhu6wwhsodxg4qq4x72aasxewp64/blog.html` - a snapshot of this blog post
* `ipns://k51qzi5uqu5dkq4jxcqvujfm2woh4p9y6inrojofxflzdnfht168zf8ynfzuu1/blog.html` - a mutable pointer to the current version of this blog
* `ipns://docs.ipfs.tech` - The IPFS documentation.
* `ipns://en.wikipedia-on-ipfs.org/wiki/` - Wikipedia, as a big HAMT + DNSLink
* `ipns://ipfs.io` - an unusual case: a DNSLink to another DNSLink
* `https://littlebearlabs.io` - an HTTPs URL for comparison.

<iframe width="70%" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/9XJOktFizlo" frameborder="1" allow="accelerometer; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## When could this be widespread?  

This is very experimental, and will not be in mainstream browsers tomorrow. Feel free to vote for [the issue](https://bugs.chromium.org/p/chromium/issues/detail?id=1440503) where we discuss its future.

## Who is doing this?

> [Little Bear Labs](https://littlebearlabs.io) and [Protocol Labs](https://protocol.ai)

Reviewer 3: Maybe have more call to action about whether you're looking for others to participate and how they can get involved in development or testing (or do you just want to coordinate that in the chromium issue above?)

Author: Honestly we have different audiences in mind, and I might ask them for different responses.

One of the audiences - I plan to link to this blog post _in_ that ticket, as a way to help explain to Chromium folks what this is about. It doesn't make sense to ask _them_ to head over to the ticket and comment there.
